(c) 2013 Galois, Inc.

Author: Erlend Hamberg and Lee Pike (leepike@galois.com)

# Overview

This package generates run-time monitors for C/C++ programs compiled via GCC.
The user adds an `instrumented` attribute to global variables to be monitored.
A GCC plugin automatically instruments every occurrence in the program in which
the variables are updated to save the variable's value.  Thus, a stream of
variable values is generated.  The user can then write temporal properties over
the streams of variables to check properties of the variables on-line.

# Installing

Install the GCC plugin:

    > cd GCC-Plugin
    > make
    > make test

This should result in some sample output from an instrumented program.  Read
[GCC-Plugin/README.md][GCC-Plugin/README.md] for more information about building
and testing the plugin.

For cross-compilers, the plugin can be generated with a compiler on the host
platform, but compilation must (1) be 32-bit if the cross-compiler is 32-bit,
and (2) compile as C++ if cross-compilation is C++.  Adjust the definitions of
the compiler appropriately in the Makefile (e.g., gcc, g++, etc.).  To compile
as 32-bit, do

    > make EXPLICIT32=1

After building and confirming the plugin works, do

    > cd rtv-lib; cabal install

To install the Haskell package that depends on the plugin.

# Usage

In rtv-example is a toy example using the framework.  This will show a simple
example of how to declare global variables to be instrumented so that GCC
automatically records their history.  Then, the values taken by the variables
can be checked off-line or by a separate process.

The example contains hand-written and auto-generated C.  To generate the
example, do something like the following:

    bash ../../rtv-lib/build-tools/find-instrumented.sh ./ > instrumented-decls
    cabal install
    ./LOCATION_OF_CABAL_EXECS/bin/rtv-example
    make

`find-instrumented.sh` greps C sources recursively from the directory provided
for a file that contains global declarations like

    int a __attribute__((instrument(0))) = 1;

The results are placed into the file `instrumented-decls`, which is assumed to
exist in the current directory.  The contents of `instrumented-decls` are parsed
and used by Template Haskell to generate Haskell code implementing
correctly-typed setter and getter functions at compile-time.  The declarations
are assumed to not require pre-processing, and there is lightweight parsing of
the declarations, which may be broken with other specifiers.  The user can
manually put post-processed declarations in an `instrumented-decls` file.

The Template Haskell splices are generated by calling `gettersAndHist` from the
rtv-lib package.  See `examples/PropertiesExamples.hs` for an example.

After building the package, executing it should generate an `out` directory
containing C sources and headers generated by the runtime verification system:

* `out/instrumented.c`: For each variable, generates an API for storing and
  retrieving variable values.

* `out/ivory.h`: [Ivory][https://github.com/GaloisInc/ivory] is the C code
  generator used, which is a Haskell EDSL.  This is the standard lib for Ivory.

* `out/runtime-checker.c`: The property checker generated.  Properties are
  specified in `examples/PropertiesExamples.hs` using temporal operators.  The
  interface to check the conjunction of all generated properties is
  `check_properties()`.  In our case, we are checking if instrumented variable 0
  (`a`) is always less than or equal to instrumented variable 1 (`b`).

In `example/` are hand-written C files:

* `example/checker_task.c`: This specifies what to do if runtime checks fail,
  which is application specific.

* `example/record_assignment.c`: This specifies what should be done whenever a
  variable that contains an `instrument` attribute is updated.  The user writes
  a function with the signature

    void record_assignment(int var_id, void* value)

  That takes the identifier of a variable (the argument to the `instrument`
  attribute) and the value before the variable is reassigned.  What is done is
  implementation-specific.  (In our RTOS implementation, the value is sent to a
  checker task on a channel, and the checker task stores it.)  In this example,
  we'll simply make a call `append_to_history`, defined in `instrumented.c`.

* `example/monitored_task.c`: This is the program we're monitoring.  GCC will
  automatically instrument each location in which a global variable that has an
  `instrument` attribute is updated with a call to `record_assignment()`.  Note
  that we currently don't do pointer analysis, so it is possible to change a
  variable's value without GCC instrumenting it.  If you look at the executable
  in function `update`, you should see the call; e.g.:

    400642:       e8 29 00 00 00          callq  400670 <record_assignment>
    400647:       89 1d f7 09 20 00       mov    %ebx,0x2009f7(%rip)

# Current Limitations/Future Work

* No pointer-analysis is done, so if GCC can not figure out that the variable is
  being modified, no record_assignment() call will be inserted.

* While record_assignment() is relatively cheap, if a variable is updated
  frequently in a tight loop, exceptional overhead will be added to the program.

* Struct and array monitoring are not supported, only base types.

* We grep instrumented attributes from sources and do lightweight parsing.  We
  assume no pre-processing is needed and some modifiers may break the parser.
  *Please report bugs in parsing*.

